# Foreword

This book is certainly not a light introduction to JavaScript. That's not to
say that this book is not for a novice JavaScript developers. It's going to be
overwhelming, but I believe well worth it. Here's why.

The aim of this book is to provide accumulated experience of a working
JavaScript developer on each and every topic. The layers that build up as you
progress as a developers are here condensed into a single compact treatment of
each topic. On the other hand, this book does not try to arrive at conclusions
the same way you would if you were learning on your own. This is intentional,
and will hopefully remove some of the confusion and mystery around the concepts
being discussed.

This book is not meant to be read cover-to-cover. Topics are mostly
self-contained, with references to other topics only as needed to understand
the current one. It is also not meant to be memorized, but read and re-read as
you run into problems that are covered in each sections. Even if you feel that
the material is overwhelming, I suggest you mentally bookmark the sections so
you can get back to them for some later time, when you discover that what you
are doing has some semblance to what you saw in this book.

Individual sections of this book are written as literate ECMAScript 6 modules.
This means that the code snippets embedded in the markdown comprise a complete
working program that can be executed using NodeJS. Please refer to the
[README file in the source repository](https://github.com/foxbunny/javascript-by-example)
for instructions on how to run the examples.

This book is also a work in progress. New chapters are added (almost) every
week, as my time permits, or as I run into new and interesting topics I wish
to explore.

Finally, it is my hope that this book is going to end up being a collaborative
effort between you, my readers, and me. I encourage you to send me feedback by
[filing an issue on
GitHub](https://github.com/foxbunny/javascript-by-example/issues)  or
commenting directly [on the online version of the
book](https://foxbunny.gitbooks.io/assimilate-js/content/).
